
1. Int J Health Geogr. 2018 Feb 14;17(1):4. doi: 10.1186/s12942-018-0125-0.

Current and future distribution of Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus (Diptera:
Culicidae) in WHO Eastern Mediterranean Region.

Ducheyne E(1), Tran Minh NN(2), Haddad N(3), Bryssinckx W(4), Buliva E(2), Simard
F(5), Malik MR(2), Charlier J(4), De Waele V(4), Mahmoud O(6), Mukhtar M(7),
Bouattour A(8), Hussain A(9), Hendrickx G(4), Roiz D(2)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Avia-GIS, Zoersel, Belgium. educheyne@avia-gis.com.
(2)Regional Office for the Eastern Mediterranean, World Health Organisation,
Cairo, Egypt.
(3)Laboratory of Immunology and Vector-Borne Diseases, Faculty of Public Health, 
Lebanese University, Fanar, Lebanon.
(4)Avia-GIS, Zoersel, Belgium.
(5)MIVEGEC Lab, IRD/CNRS/UM, Montpellier, France.
(6)Directorate General for Disease Surveillance and Control, Ministry of Health, 
Muscat, Sultanate of Oman.
(7)Directorate of Malaria Control, Islamabad, Pakistan.
(8)Institut Pasteur Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia.
(9)Vector Control Focal Point, Ministry of Health, Puntland, Somalia.

BACKGROUND: Aedes-borne diseases as dengue, zika, chikungunya and yellow fever
are an emerging problem worldwide, being transmitted by Aedes aegypti and Aedes
albopictus. Lack of up to date information about the distribution of Aedes
species hampers surveillance and control. Global databases have been compiled but
these did not capture data in the WHO Eastern Mediterranean Region (EMR), and any
models built using these datasets fail to identify highly suitable areas where
one or both species may occur. The first objective of this study was therefore to
update the existing Ae. aegypti (Linnaeus, 1762) and Ae. albopictus (Skuse, 1895)
compendia and the second objective was to generate species distribution models
targeted to the EMR. A final objective was to engage the WHO points of contacts
within the region to provide feedback and hence validate all model outputs.
METHODS: The Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus compendia provided by Kraemer et al. 
(Sci Data 2:150035, 2015; Dryad Digit Repos, 2015) were used as starting points. 
These datasets were extended with more recent species and disease data. In the
next step, these sets were filtered using the Köppen-Geiger classification and
the Mahalanobis distance. The occurrence data were supplemented with
pseudo-absence data as input to Random Forests. The resulting suitability and
maximum risk of establishment maps were combined into hard-classified maps per
country for expert validation.
RESULTS: The EMR datasets consisted of 1995 presence locations for Ae. aegypti
and 2868 presence locations for Ae. albopictus. The resulting suitability maps
indicated that there exist areas with high suitability and/or maximum risk of
establishment for these disease vectors in contrast with previous model output.
Precipitation and host availability, expressed as population density and
night-time lights, were the most important variables for Ae. aegypti. Host
availability was the most important predictor in case of Ae. albopictus. Internal
validation was assessed geographically. External validation showed high agreement
between the predicted maps and the experts' extensive knowledge of the terrain.
CONCLUSION: Maps of distribution and maximum risk of establishment were created
for Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus for the WHO EMR. These region-specific maps
highlighted data gaps and these gaps will be filled using targeted monitoring and
surveillance. This will increase the awareness and preparedness of the different 
countries for Aedes borne diseases.

DOI: 10.1186/s12942-018-0125-0 
PMCID: PMC5813415
PMID: 29444675  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Malar J. 2017 Sep 29;16(1):391. doi: 10.1186/s12936-017-2041-3.

Statistical prediction of immunity to placental malaria based on multi-assay
antibody data for malarial antigens.

Siriwardhana C(1), Fang R(1), Salanti A(2), Leke RGF(3), Bobbili N(4), Taylor
DW(4), Chen JJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Biostatistics Core, Department of Complementary and Integrative Medicine, John
A. Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI, 96813, 
USA.
(2)Centre for Medical Parasitology at Department of Immunology and Microbiology, 
University of Copenhagen and Department of Infectious Diseases, Copenhagen
University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)The Biotechnology Center, Faculty of Medicine and Biomedical Research,
University of Yaoundé I, Yaoundé, Cameroon.
(4)Department of Tropical Medicine, Medical Microbiology and Pharmacology, John
A. Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI, 96813, 
USA.
(5)Biostatistics Core, Department of Complementary and Integrative Medicine, John
A. Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI, 96813, 
USA. jjchen@hawaii.edu.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium falciparum infections are especially severe in pregnant
women because infected erythrocytes (IE) express VAR2CSA, a ligand that binds to 
placental trophoblasts, causing IE to accumulate in the placenta. Resulting
inflammation and pathology increases a woman's risk of anemia, miscarriage,
premature deliveries, and having low birthweight (LBW) babies. Antibodies (Ab) to
VAR2CSA reduce placental parasitaemia and improve pregnancy outcomes. Currently, 
no single assay is able to predict if a woman has adequate immunity to prevent
placental malaria (PM). This study measured Ab levels to 28 malarial antigens and
used the data to develop statistical models for predicting if a woman has
sufficient immunity to prevent PM.
METHODS: Archival plasma samples from 1377 women were screened in a bead-based
multiplex assay for Ab to 17 VAR2CSA-associated antigens (full length VAR2CSA
(FV2), DBL 1-6 of the FCR3, 3D7 and 7G8 lines, ID1-ID2a (FCR3 and 3D7) and 11
antigens that have been reported to be associated with immunity to P. falciparum 
(AMA-1, CSP, EBA-175, LSA1, MSP1, MSP2, MSP3, MSP11, Pf41, Pf70 and RESA)). Ab
levels along with clinical variables (age, gravidity) were used in the following 
seven statistical approaches: logistic regression full model, logistic regression
reduced model, recursive partitioning, random forests, linear discriminant
analysis, quadratic discriminant analysis, and support vector machine.
RESULTS: The best and simplest model proved to be the logistic regression reduced
model. AMA-1, MSP2, EBA-175, Pf41, and MSP11 were found to be the top five most
important predictors for the PM status based on overall prediction performance.
CONCLUSIONS: Not surprising, significant differences were observed between PM
positive (PM+) and PM negative (PM-) groups for Ab levels to the majority of
malaria antigens. Individually though, these malarial antigens did not achieve
reasonably high performances in terms of predicting the PM status. Utilizing
multiple antigens in predictive models considerably improved discrimination power
compared to individual assays. Among seven different classifiers considered, the 
reduced logistic regression model produces the best overall predictive
performance.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-017-2041-3 
PMCID: PMC5622501
PMID: 28962616  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. J Infect Dis. 2017 Aug 15;216(4):468-476. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jix334.

Association of a Novel Mutation in the Plasmodium falciparum Chloroquine
Resistance Transporter With Decreased Piperaquine Sensitivity.

Agrawal S(1), Moser KA(2), Morton L(1), Cummings MP(3), Parihar A(2), Dwivedi
A(2), Shetty AC(2), Drabek EF(2), Jacob CG(1), Henrich PP(4), Parobek CM(5),
Jongsakul K(6), Huy R(7), Spring MD(6), Lanteri CA(6), Chaorattanakawee S(6)(8), 
Lon C(9)(6), Fukuda MM(6), Saunders DL(6), Fidock DA(4)(10), Lin JT(5), Juliano
JJ(5), Plowe CV(1), Silva JC(2), Takala-Harrison S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Malaria Research, Institute for Global Health.
(2)Institute for Genome Sciences, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore.
(3)Center for Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, University of Maryland,
College Park.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology.
(5)Division of Infectious Diseases, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
(6)Armed Forces Research Institute of Medical Sciences, Department of Immunology 
and Medicine.
(7)National Center for Parasitology Entomology and Malaria Control, Phnom Penh,
Cambodia.
(8)Department of Parasitology and Entomology, Faculty of Public Health, Mahidol
University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(9)Armed Forces Research Institute of Medical Sciences.
(10)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Columbia University 
Medical Center, New York.

Background: Amplified copy number in the plasmepsin II/III genes within
Plasmodium falciparum has been associated with decreased sensitivity to
piperaquine. To examine this association and test whether additional loci might
also contribute, we performed a genome-wide association study of ex vivo P.
falciparum susceptibility to piperaquine.
Methods: Plasmodium falciparum DNA from 183 samples collected primarily from
Cambodia was genotyped at 33716 genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs). Linear mixed models and random forests were used to estimate associations
between parasite genotypes and piperaquine susceptibility. Candidate
polymorphisms were evaluated for their association with
dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine treatment outcomes in an independent dataset.
Results: Single nucleotide polymorphisms on multiple chromosomes were associated 
with piperaquine 90% inhibitory concentrations (IC90) in a genome-wide analysis. 
Fine-mapping of genomic regions implicated in genome-wide analyses identified
multiple SNPs in linkage disequilibrium with each other that were significantly
associated with piperaquine IC90, including a novel mutation within the gene
encoding the P. falciparum chloroquine resistance transporter, PfCRT. This
mutation (F145I) was associated with dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine treatment
failure after adjusting for the presence of amplified plasmepsin II/III, which
was also associated with decreased piperaquine sensitivity.
Conclusions: Our data suggest that, in addition to plasmepsin II/III copy number,
other loci, including pfcrt, may also be involved in piperaquine resistance.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious
Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jix334 
PMCID: PMC5853219
PMID: 28931241  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Heredity (Edinb). 2015 Nov;115(5):471-9. doi: 10.1038/hdy.2015.39. Epub 2015 Apr 
29.

Genome-wide QTL mapping of saltwater tolerance in sibling species of Anopheles
(malaria vector) mosquitoes.

Smith HA(1)(2), White BJ(1)(2)(3), Kundert P(1)(2), Cheng C(1)(2),
Romero-Severson J(1)(2), Andolfatto P(4)(5), Besansky NJ(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN,
USA.
(2)Eck Institute for Global Health, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN,
USA.
(3)Department of Entomology, University of California-Riverside, Riverside, CA,
USA.
(4)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Princeton University,
Princeton, NJ, USA.
(5)The Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics, Princeton University,
Princeton, NJ, USA.

Although freshwater (FW) is the ancestral habitat for larval mosquitoes, multiple
species independently evolved the ability to survive in saltwater (SW). Here, we 
use quantitative trait locus (QTL) mapping to investigate the genetic
architecture of osmoregulation in Anopheles mosquitoes, vectors of human malaria.
We analyzed 1134 backcross progeny from a cross between the obligate FW species
An. coluzzii, and its closely related euryhaline sibling species An. merus. Tests
of 2387 markers with Bayesian interval mapping and machine learning (random
forests) yielded six genomic regions associated with SW tolerance. Overlap in QTL
regions from both approaches enhances confidence in QTL identification. Evidence 
exists for synergistic as well as disruptive epistasis among loci. Intriguingly, 
one QTL region containing ion transporters spans the 2Rop chromosomal inversion
that distinguishes these species. Rather than a simple trait controlled by one or
a few loci, our data are most consistent with a complex, polygenic mode of
inheritance.

DOI: 10.1038/hdy.2015.39 
PMCID: PMC4611235
PMID: 25920668  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Water Resour Res. 2014 Nov;50(11):8791-8806. Epub 2014 Nov 17.

Multisensor earth observations to characterize wetlands and malaria epidemiology 
in Ethiopia.

Midekisa A(1), Senay GB(2), Wimberly MC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Geospatial Sciences Center of Excellence, South Dakota State University
Brookings, South Dakota, USA.
(2)U.S. Geological Survey Earth Resources Observation and Science Center Sioux
Falls, South Dakota, USA.

Malaria is a major global public health problem, particularly in Sub-Saharan
Africa. The spatial heterogeneity of malaria can be affected by factors such as
hydrological processes, physiography, and land cover patterns. Tropical wetlands,
for example, are important hydrological features that can serve as mosquito
breeding habitats. Mapping and monitoring of wetlands using satellite remote
sensing can thus help to target interventions aimed at reducing malaria
transmission. The objective of this study was to map wetlands and other major
land cover types in the Amhara region of Ethiopia and to analyze district-level
associations of malaria and wetlands across the region. We evaluated three random
forests classification models using remotely sensed topographic and spectral data
based on Shuttle Radar Topographic Mission (SRTM) and Landsat TM/ETM+ imagery,
respectively. The model that integrated data from both sensors yielded more
accurate land cover classification than single-sensor models. The resulting map
of wetlands and other major land cover classes had an overall accuracy of 93.5%. 
Topographic indices and subpixel level fractional cover indices contributed most 
strongly to the land cover classification. Further, we found strong spatial
associations of percent area of wetlands with malaria cases at the district level
across the dry, wet, and fall seasons. Overall, our study provided the most
extensive map of wetlands for the Amhara region and documented spatiotemporal
associations of wetlands and malaria risk at a broad regional level. These
findings can assist public health personnel in developing strategies to
effectively control and eliminate malaria in the region.KEY POINTS: Remote
sensing produced an accurate wetland map for the Ethiopian highlandsWetlands were
associated with spatial variability in malaria riskMapping and monitoring
wetlands can improve malaria spatial decision support.

DOI: 10.1002/2014WR015634 
PMCID: PMC4303930
PMID: 25653462 


1. Malar J. 2013 Feb 11;12:61. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-61.

Rapid case-based mapping of seasonal malaria transmission risk for strategic
elimination planning in Swaziland.

Cohen JM, Dlamini S, Novotny JM, Kandula D, Kunene S, Tatem AJ.

BACKGROUND: As successful malaria control programmes move towards elimination,
they must identify residual transmission foci, target vector control to high-risk
areas, focus on both asymptomatic and symptomatic infections, and manage
importation risk. High spatial and temporal resolution maps of malaria risk can
support all of these activities, but commonly available malaria maps are based on
parasite rate, a poor metric for measuring malaria at extremely low prevalence.
New approaches are required to provide case-based risk maps to countries seeking 
to identify remaining hotspots of transmission while managing the risk of
transmission from imported cases.
METHODS: Household locations and travel histories of confirmed malaria patients
during 2011 were recorded through routine surveillance by the Swaziland National 
Malaria Control Programme for the higher transmission months of January to April 
and the lower transmission months of May to December. Household locations for
patients with no travel history to endemic areas were compared against a random
set of background points sampled proportionate to population density with respect
to a set of variables related to environment, population density, vector control,
and distance to the locations of identified imported cases. Comparisons were made
separately for the high and low transmission seasons. The Random Forests
regression tree classification approach was used to generate maps predicting the 
probability of a locally acquired case at 100 m resolution across Swaziland for
each season.
RESULTS: Results indicated that case households during the high transmission
season tended to be located in areas of lower elevation, closer to bodies of
water, in more sparsely populated areas, with lower rainfall and warmer
temperatures, and closer to imported cases than random background points (all
p < 0.001). Similar differences were evident during the low transmission season. 
Maps from the fit models suggested better predictive ability during the high
season. Both models proved useful at predicting the locations of local cases
identified in 2012.
CONCLUSIONS: The high-resolution mapping approaches described here can help
elimination programmes understand the epidemiology of a disappearing disease.
Generating case-based risk maps at high spatial and temporal resolution will
allow control programmes to direct interventions proactively according to
evidence-based measures of risk and ensure that the impact of limited resources
is maximized to achieve and maintain malaria elimination.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-61 
PMCID: PMC3637471
PMID: 23398628  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

